# Outlining the mall service area 

Client Nonprofit Reimagine Turtle Creek (RTC) in the beginning stages of proposing the Monroeville Mall rebrand as an ecomall and community focal point. As discussed, the next step in this process is kicking off a comprehensive community engagement process that asks community members to envision what they wish the future of the mall would look like. Given your organization is already at capacity and resources are limited, we respect that the cost of tools and upkeep is an important consideration. The project will likely require an additional survey and market analysis, given the reception of this first wave of work. 

## The Objective
Need #1: Discover the mall service area /


Need #2: Analyze area consumer expenditure /
<iframe src="https://insights.arcgis.com/#/embed/dbdbe7e43589402fbc0d1b45fcdcabce" width="100%" height="100%" frameborder="0"></iframe>
Need #3: Identify where community engagement can occur/
<iframe src="https://insights.arcgis.com/#/embed/cce2b130a78642339803039cd274127f" width="100%" height="100%" frameborder="0"></iframe>

## The Opportunity
Contextualizing your service area and role in the community informs this project. As an environmental advocacy nonprofit, you reference your service area as the physical watershed, but also acknowledge some flexibility in this designation given municipal and watershed lines do not always align. While the watershed overlaps with the mall, the mall service area pulls a wider audience. This is the premise for conducting a mapping exercise. Additionally, stakeholders responded well to data presented in map form during preliminary meetings. And, given you conduct community meetings as visioning sessions, maps can further serve as a means of community feedback. 
Community input sought by the client so far is admittedly limited to existing contacts non representative of the area. Given the racial diversity of this region and the need for a wide audience for a mall to survive, this next round of community engagement must be comprehensive. Thus, an additional goal to aid in community meeting facilitation by creating a prototype of a means of receiving community feedback in respect of your capacity. 

## The Process
Given this is a new endeavor, the first stage of the project will data location. Layers sought include municipal boundaries, the watershed boundary, building footprints, and land use zoning. From there, I will clip layers to connect relationships as well as center in on the relevant region. I will create a buffer from the mall, based on mall draw research, to estimate a service area that will serve as the base for further community engagement. Within this new boundary, I will further analyze consumer expenditure to begin to understand the variety of needs of the region. Then, I will add cetroids to regions of this new service area as suggested community engagement points. Or, if community engagement remains digital, clusters of communities to address together. Thus the RTC can use this map to strategically begin a campaign of community engagement that balances perspectives across the entire service region. 

# The Budge
The estimated costs of this project are based on a $100/hour base rate for labor and overhead. Layered on top of this is the cost is software and potential data costs.Thankfully, through the Western Pa Data Center, most data is open source. In order to get consumer expenditure data, however, I used Policy Map which is subscription based. But as consumer expenditures are already geocoded, it is ultimately time saving on the labor end. 
I’ve created a sheet to update expenses along the way. However, I offer an initial bid before calculations. Referencing back, I spent over 37 hours on my final project last year, though I ran into substantial troubleshooting and had to refine my idea within that period. Thus, I benchmark this project as requiring around 25 hours. This would mean $2,500 in labor costs. On top of that, ArcGIS Insights costs $500 annually. Policy Map is more difficult to estimate as it varies per size of firm and type of institution. Additionally, I need a subscription that allows for customizing the study area. For the sake of this exercise, if I am an independent GIS consultant Policy Map is not a great fit. However, if I am in a small firm, a standard annual subscription costs $2,100 for five users, or $420 a piece. Thus, together my bid for this project would be $3,420.


# Project Deliverable
Given the variant needs of the client, the deliverable will be an Insights dashboard. Not only is Inights more cost effective, it also directly addresses issues the client is encountering in terms of visualization and pans out to the large region. Consistent with user feedback presented in a recent class, the client responds well to intentionally visualized data. This is a case dependent on visuals to stress the importance of community engagement. Also, the interactive nature of Insights is attractive for a project like this that may require reference back to specific layers or municipalities after the initial set up. 
For presentation purposes, I will also deliver a Story Map that synthesizes the process and components of the map. Story map subscriptions are $100 annually. This will serve to better stress the narrative about the need for larger scale community engagement, as well as highlight consumer spending habits and other variables applicable to the ecomall concept. Ultimately, the Insights dashboard and story maps can also serve as tools themselves to share with the community in helping to visualize the map service area. With these visualizations, the client can better engage with the community, both strategically and substantially. 

# Review of the Project
Ultimately, Insights lent itself very well to this project as it was built around finding gaps and easily allows adding layers and enriching on the go. After an initial troubleshooting sesion of getting all my layers to show up, I did not encounter the same timely set-backs I did last project. Additionally, I was still able to experiment with various tools without consequence on additional pages, a feature I thought reserved for ArcGIS Pro. I did cheat and go into Pro at one point, so I could more easily upload onto ArcGIS online for Story Maps. However, I would like to think that I only use it as a through-point and because it was already there and would not actually charge a client a full scription for that. If I lacked the full subscription I would go the route of embedding. 
	When it come to the interactive community feedback component, I worked with a new tool - Framer - to mock up a mobile friendly means of feedback. Better yet, this tool is free and sharable. The backend was user-friendly and thus transferable into your domain for rollout. Also, I discovered an interactive map product that could further aid in visioning sessions of the future. Maptionnarie, provides an all-in-one service so that the interface, survey, and interactive map become a digital bundle for community outreach. This is really powerful as it can digitize the -draw/post it note on a map concept- that long characterized urban planning visioning sessions but is difficult to aggregate. Unfortunately, without a grant this product is likely out of reach given available resources. 

## Expense Review
I was actually not too far off when it came to time benchmarking. However, I ignored some software costs the first time around. Story Maps, for instance, is a $100 annual fee. I since added this into the estimation, but, perhaps since it was one of the last tasks, I did not remember it initially. This could be avoided by better mapping out the entire project ahead of the bid, like some of the complex Gantt charts presented. Additionally, I thought I could reserve resources by limiting mapping to Insights rather than ArcGIS Pro. However, I ultimately used Pro, especially as a means to upload maps to Esri Online and for Story Maps. I would like to think if I did not already have access I would not have sought out Pro for just these tasks. 
	When it came to specific estimations, I reformed my predictions based on overall categories rather than individual tasks after the helpful in-class review session. I anticipated mapping would take the majority of labor hours, which was true. However, I overestimated the amount of time needed for the app mock up. Since this particular task was new to me I calculated in discovery/learning time. However, the tool used was very user friendly and thus expedited the process. The ongoing nature of the relationship with the client limited background research expense and highlighted the advantage of long term relationships, a theme of the project. 
	Ultimately, I was close to budget without factoring in ArcGIS Pro costs, but way over if factoring in the cost of full subscription. 



